So I'm Kristina, and I had my start
as a copywriter back in the mid 90s,
and when the web became
commercialized in about 97,
I decided that I was going to double
down on writing for websites.
And so I started working with a lot
of agencies who were also very
excited about this thing called the web.
So, I very, very quickly came
to realize that writing for
websites was not at all like writing for
sure a catalog.
I did a lot of studying around usability
testing and information architecture and
experience design.
And what I found was a complete lack of
knowledge or instruction around writing,
or creating content for
the digital environment.
And it was one thing to worry about
how do you write for online readers?
And how do you structure content
on the page for online readers?
It was quite another thing to try to
find information about how to get and
plan for content that was gonna be
useful and usable to the online reader.
And so what would happen is that
I would walk into these teams and
they would say things like, okay,
we've been on the project for nine months,
and the design is done,
the AI is done, the coding is done.
And now we've got our dev team sitting
on their hands waiting for the content,
and that's where you come in.
And I get handed a sitemap
with a bunch of labels.
So I'd go in and I'd make a content
inventory which we'll talk about just
a list of content requirements
in a spreadsheet.
And I tried to start writing but I would
have no idea what the page objectives are,
who the core audiences were,
what the core what the key messaging was,
how the pages were linked together
in the user experience journey.
I wouldn't know anything
about the search strategy,
who is gonna write the metadata, where
the error messages were gonna come from.
I had just a million questions and
nobody could answer them for me, or
nobody wanted to answer them for me.
Because I had Microsoft Word and
I was a writer, so
I was just supposed to be
able to create the content.
Just like they expected the client was
going to just magically create the content
and handle the content over, and
that just never ever, ever happened.
We'd be missing all the H tags, and
I mean, it was just a disaster.
And so I ended up kind of backing into
this thing called content strategy,
which I didn't really
realize was content strategy.
But I just started inserting myself
into these meetings earlier and
earlier in the project process,
which of course, nobody wanted to pay for.
Because they'd already spent their $96 and
they had $4 left for
content, all thousand pages of it.
So I imagine my delight when I found
out that this was a thing called
content strategy.
So I wrote a book about the topic in 2009,
it was the first book that was published
on content strategy for the web.
And that has served I think
the community and writers and
content strategists and experienced
designers and developers for a while.
So I've done a ton of
teaching on the process.
We also host a content strategy conference
here in town every year called Confab that
welcomes folks from all
different disciplines.
Which is kind of always been the vision of
the conference that everybody that does
all the things related to
the internet across now all of its
glorious platforms and screens would
kind of come together to have real
conversations about
the complexities of content.
So we're gonna dig into
those complexities today.
We're also gonna talk about the strategy
part of content strategy, which will get
us out of I think our day to day sort of
to dos that we have in project mindset.
And so even if some of this is not
directly applicable to your day to
day work, what I find I really enjoy
just sort of thinking about it,
getting my brain wrapped around it, and
pushing myself to think in different ways.
It's good for the elasticity of my brain.
So hopefully you guys will have some good
takeaways and some good thinking time.
Okay, great.
So, what is the single most important
skill for a content strategist?
It's not what you think and I'm not gonna
make you try to answer because you're all
still waking up and none of you will.
It is listening.
And this is the first and last you'll
see a PowerPoint clip art guy, but
I came across him and
I just couldn't resist.
The very, very early part of
any project is exactly when we
need to start talking about the content.
And as a content strategist, it's our
job to ask really good smart questions
that will help people see the complexities
of content that they are committing to.
Or that it's not just a brainstorm and
it's not just an outline that we're
gonna create, that it is more than
just post it notes up on a wall.
Because we can start that conversation
early is going to lay the foundation for
much smoother process later on in the
project, and people will be more invested.
The secret of conversation is that the
more you can get the other person to talk,
the more that person is gonna
trust you and like you.
So, it can be extremely difficult
when we're sitting in meetings and
people are questioning our work, or
have different priorities than we do,
or are just saying dumb things
that are making us crazy.
But if we can listen actively and
reflect back to people what it
is that they're saying,
it actually creates pathways for
them to be able to listen to us and
to our perspective.
So we're gonna start today
by interviewing each other,
which I know you're all excited about.
If you're at home, you can interview
yourselves [LAUGH] or your cat.
So this is, I don't know how much,
one of the things that I see in content
is that a lot of the disconnects
that happened are because content,
we'll talk about this
two content activities,
are really spread out throughout a team or
an organization.
It's very rare that we have like this
beautiful centralized content strategy
team that is connecting all the dots
between all the different functions.
They usually there are conversations
happening about content in IT, for
example, and conversations happening in
marketing and conversations happening in
UX design, and conversations happening
within the subject matter experts.
And there's no connective tissue
between those things, and
that's the role that
content strategy can play.
So, if there are pain points that
you are experiencing with content,
the best way to begin to solve them is to
sit down with somebody over coffee and
just say, tell me about what your pain
points are, where you see opportunities.
So, here are the questions that I would
like to have you guys think about.
We don't need to go on to what do you
think will make this project a success
necessarily.
What I would love to do is have you
just sit with each other, ask about
what your role is, either within your
organization or this time in your career.
If you can just give observations
about what you have seen and
his primary pain points in the development
part or design process with content,
that would be terrific.
If you haven't had that much experience
working directly with a writer or
with a content strategist at all,
maybe you wanna talk
about just general pain points you as
a web user experience with content online.
There are so much pain and
suffering around the topic of
content [LAUGH] that I just encourage you
to sort of explore that with each other.
And then what I'd like to have you
do is try to differentiate between
what the symptoms are and the cause.
But here's why we're gonna do this,
is that one of you is going to be
the interviewer and
one of you is going to be the interviewee.
And as the interviewer,
here are your directions, okay?
One thing that happens when we
are interviewing is that our own
perspectives and ideas and
thoughts start to bubble up.
And we either want to add our two cents or
empathize or jump in with a solution.
This is a huge thing that I see especially
with experience consultants is that
I often say that there
are 1,000,001 content symptoms, and
a very finite number of
actual problem causes.
I want to go back and
talk about that real quick, too.
So, I feel like I've seen just
about everything there is to see
when in terms of dysfunction content
within teams and organizations.
But it's very important for me not to jump
in and go, yeah, I've seen that before,
and you know one thing that we should
talk about is, and jump to solution.
So, your first job as an interviewer
is to just be quiet and listen.
If you have to take notes, ask permission.
Before you do start taking notes, I want
to encourage you all to take notes in
these mock interview sessions,
because the art of listening and
writing at the same time is something
that needs to be kind of developed.
I typically we'll take notes by
hand just because it allows me
a more personal connection with
the person that I'm interviewing, but
I certainly will let you do whatever
you're most comfortable with.
Don't finish sentences.
Don't try to relate.
Don't offer solutions or
insights on the spot.
And then this is like one of the most
magical things that can happen especially
when somebody is feeling defensive and
shuts down.
Or just says yes or no or
gives a very abrupt answer,
is to be able to just say
these like magical words,
which is tell me more about that and
it just really opens up.
This is a magical phrase, I use with
my children when they're just like, no.
It just helps people open up and again,
the more you can get them talking,
the more you're going to be able to
establish kind of that trust with them,
okay?
All right, what I wanted to talk
about with symptoms and causes.
So let me give you a few examples.
So, we earlier before we started streaming
a question had come up came up very,
very quickly around legal, and
how difficult it can be when
you craft this gorgeous content and
it is onpoint, it's readable,
it's scannable,
it's the messaging is consistent.
It serves user top tasks,
all this great stuff, and
then you hand it off to legal and
legal just completely destroys it, right?
And it comes back and it's crap.
So we can say, that's the problem.
But there is a difference between
a problem symptom and a problem cause.
And actually legals coming back
with a bunch of legal lease, and
us being frustrated, and being in pain,
that's actually a symptom.
The cause of this,
is that legal does not understand,
or does not care about
the ultimate usability and
findability and relevancy of that content.
And so,
if that then is our actual problem cause,
there are a couple of solutions to it, one
of which is simply to get them educated
through a series of meetings or
interviews, or tell me more about that.
I'll actually give you a metaphor that I
use quite a bit about when we're sick.
So, if I have a sore throat,
I'm like, my throat is sore, well,
that's not my problem, right?
I mean, that's a symptom,
that is a symptom.
To find out the cause of that symptom,
we go to the doctor.
And the doctor will give a diagnosis and
say, well, okay you have strep.
So then there is a treatment plan, and
then there is follow up
throughout on that treatment.
And a lot of times this is really
effective way to think about it when we
are diagnosing our content
problems as well, okay?
So as you're interviewing,
try to differentiate in your own
mind the difference between
what a symptom might be.
And then part of our role as content
strategists is digging in and
identifying the root cause so we can
come up with a treatment plan, okay?
All right, so I am going to actually
list those three things as your questions.
So if you guys can partner up and
anybody that's available, I think that we
have an odd number of, no, we don't we
haven't even number of folks here now.
So, let's take about five
minutes on each side,
you can decide who's gonna
be the interviewer and
who's gonna be the interviewee,
and we'll go